hello maths fans dr tom crawford here
from the university of oxford
and today we're talking about critical
points for functions of two variables
but to start with
let's remind ourselves of critical
points for a function of
one variable so if i were to draw
the following graph
and here i'm thinking of x on here is
going to be y
is a function of x
so there are several things that can
happen here we could have
for example a local maximum
maybe there's a local minimum and then
we have
the classic point of inflection now in
all of these cases
the max the min and the inflection point
the critical point that we are
interested in
occurs when the derivative is equal
to zero the gradient of our curve goes
flat
at the critical point so here the
gradient
is positive it goes through zero flat
and then the gradient becomes negative
here there's a change from the negative
gradient
through zero as it goes flat and then it
starts to increase
and then here the gradient continues to
increase
but it does pass through zero at the
inflection point
so the way to find critical points for a
function of one variable
is simply to solve f prime of
x or df by dx
equal to zero so you differentiate your
function
and then solve equal to zero to find the
location
of your critical points so why don't we
try the same
for our function of two variables find
out where its derivative is zero
to get the location of the critical
point
but the question then becomes what does
it mean
for a function of two variables to have
zero derivative
well for one variable we can see from
our diagram here
that when the derivative is zero
the function is not changing in the x
direction
the curve is going flat
so in order to understand what this
means for a function of
two variables we need to be able to plot
functions of two variables and now
because we have
x and y as our variables
instead of getting a curve
we will actually get a surface and so we
need to look at a three-dimensional plot
of a particular surface z is equal to
f of x y you can actually do this with
pretty much
any function you can come up with using
the maple calculator app
on your phone it's completely free to
use and i do strongly recommend playing
around with it to try to get some
intuition
into the different kinds of surfaces you
can create
with functions of two variables all you
do is
enter z equals your function
in terms of x and y and then select 3d
plot to see what it looks like the
example i have here is
z equals x squared plus 2xy
minus y squared plus y cubed
looking at the 3d plot we can see that
it appears to go flat
around the center and so zero could
perhaps be one of our critical points
remember that for a function of one
variable we said that
the function was not changing in the
x direction at our critical point
so in two dimensions what this means
is that we need our function to not be
changing in the x direction and
also to not be changing in the y
direction so that means both the x
derivative
should be zero so that it's not changing
there is no change in that x direction
and the y derivative should also be zero
so that there is no change in my
function in the y
direction so this means we actually need
to calculate the partial derivatives
and set both of them to be zero don't
worry if you're not familiar with
partial differentiation
the key idea is to treat everything else
as a constant
except the variable that you are
differentiating with respect to
so if we take the example of the surface
we were just looking at
we had f of x
y was equal to
x squared plus 2
x y minus y squared
plus y cubed
now to calculate the partial derivatives
we want to set both the x
partial derivative and the y partial
derivative to be
zero this is our idea about what must
happen
at a critical point so that means
calculating
df by dx where we use a curly d
to denote partial derivative
and this just means i want to
differentiate this function
where x is my variable because that's
the thing i'm
interested in working out the rate of
change with respect to
and i'm just going to treat the y as
though y is a constant
so the first term is x squared so the
derivative of x squared is 2x
so that first term gives me 2x then i
have 2xy
but remember y is constant i'm only
changing
x i care about the rate of change in the
x direction
so y is a constant so therefore the
2x differentiates to give 2 so i'm left
with 2y
i just differentiate out the x
then i've got minus y squared that's a
function of y
y is a constant so a constant
differentiates to give zero
and then y cubed also a constant so that
differentiates to give
zero so the x derivative df by dx
partial derivative is 2x plus 2
y now i also need to know df
by dy and much in the same way
we are going to differentiate with
respect to y
treating x as a constant
so x squared that's a constant that
differentiates to give zero
and then we've got the two and the x are
both constants
i then have a linear function of y to
power one so that differentiates to give
me
one so i just get two x from that first
term involving the y then i've got minus
y
squared differentiate with respect to y
that gives me minus two 2y
and then i've got y cubed differentiated
gives me plus 3 y squared
so my y derivative d f by d y is 2x
minus 2y
plus 3y squared again don't worry if you
weren't able to follow those steps
because the maple calculator app will
actually give you the partial
derivatives
automatically when you enter your
equation
you simply just select x derivative and
y derivative from the
options and it will give you the results
now we said that at a critical point
both of these derivatives both of these
equations
have to be zero so now we have a set of
simultaneous equations
two equations in the two variables x and
y
which we need to solve to find the
location
the x y coordinates of our critical
points
so the first equation 2x plus 2y
equal to 0 that is going to give us that
y is equal to minus
x so we have a relationship between
the x and y coordinates and then our
second equation equal to zero
so if we substitute in x in terms of
minus y
then what we've got is minus two y
minus another 2 so minus 4y
plus 3y squared
must be 0. now
this has a common factor of y so i can
rewrite this
as y times
3y minus 4 equals 0.
and now i can solve this the two roots
of this equation
are going to be y equals zero from here
and then three y equals four so that's y
equals four
thirds
and so x is equal to minus
y means that when y is not
x is not and when y is four thirds
x is minus four thirds
so going back to our original equation
and our original
function of two variables we found that
there are two critical points
we have zero zero is a critical point
which was what i originally guessed when
looking at the 3d plot
so you can actually gain a lot by just
looking at these plots that's why they
are so helpful
and our second one has x as minus four
thirds and y
as four thirds so
this function here f of x y is
x squared plus two x y minus y squared
plus y
cubed this function of two variables in
this particular instance
has two critical points at zero zero and
at minus four thirds
four thirds and we found those critical
points
by solving for the x partial derivative
equal to zero and the y partial
derivative equal to zero
because these two equations tell us that
at
these critical points our function is
not changing
in the x direction and it is not
changing in the y
direction so that is the equivalent of a
turning point
on our original y equals f of x graph
here there is no change in x at any of
these locations
and now for our two-dimensional surface
we can see that at these two locations
there is no change in the surface the
surface is flat
and that is how we define a critical
point of a
two variable function now that we know
the location
of our critical points the next step
is going to be to classify them so just
as we have
a maximum minimum or an inflection point
in the function of one variable case
shown here we can have a maximum
minimum or what is called a saddle point
in the case when you use a function of
two variables
so join me in part two of this video
when i will go through the method of the
discriminant
which is used to classify a critical
point
for a function of two variables thank
you very much for
watching please do remember to subscribe
if you've enjoyed this video
and hopefully i'll see you again soon
you